Closed captioning funded by
A & E networks
>> Narrator: For decades,
the Soviet space program was
shrouded in secrecy.
It was a history of public
successes and hidden
disasters ... which claimed more
than 160 lives.
It wasn't until the end
of the cold war, and
the collapse of the Soviet Union
in 1991, that the secret history
of Soviet space disasters was
finally revealed.
The Soviet mission to dominate
space would ultimately become
nothing more than a dusty dream.
But during the 1960s, two space
programs are in full gear
with the moon as their goal.
Each superpower desperately
wants to be the first to put
a man on the moon.
To put their cosmonauts
on the moon, Russia needs
a rocket big enough to get them
there.
>> N1 was a super rocket,
counter part to American Saturn.
to launch Soviet counterpart
to Apollo to the moon.
>> Narrator: By the late 1960s,
the Saturn-5 has proven itself
as NASA's workhorse.
By early 1969, the Soviets are
preparing to launch the N-1.
Unlike the Saturn, it is
Top-Secret.
While the Saturn-5 uses 11 huge
engines in three stages,
the Soviet N1 relies
on a complicated array
of 42 smaller engines.
There are 30 engines
in the first stage alone.
Eight more in stage two.
While the third stage has
the four final engines.
But, with more engines,
the risks multiply.
...
Michael Cassutt
Author "Who's Who in Space"
...
>> There's three huge stages
and 30 engines in the first
stage, all built by
a manufacturer that was not
particularly experienced
in building rockets.
It was an aircraft engine
builder.
It was horribly complicated.
>> Narrator: The gigantic takeoff pad is readied as
the launch date for the mammoth rocket draws near.
On February 21st, 1969,
the Soviets launched
the unmanned N1.
Liftoff goes smoothly, then
70 seconds into flight,
the engines malfunction.
The rocket is completely
destroyed and so, it seems, are
Soviet hopes of beating America
to the moon.
But the Soviets still believe
the N1 can succeed.
On July 3rd, 1969, two weeks
before the "Apollo 11" launch,
the Russians send up a second
N1.
>> By time it cleared the tower,
this launch vehicle had shut
down all of its engines except
one, which ultimately caused
the vehicle to tip over and come
down crashing, like that,
onto the launch facility totally
destroying the launch facility
and knocking the turning
tower gantry off its turning base
and also leveling
on of the lightning towers
completely.
It was like a tactical nuke
blast.
>> Narrator: The damage is
devastating.
It is two years before
the Soviets will be able to use
the rocket facility again.
But America is right
on schedule.
On July 16th, 1969, "Apollo 11"
takes off for its historic
journey to the moon.
For four days the world waits
to know its fate.
What no one but American
intelligence and NASA know is
that the Soviets haven't given up.
Three days earlier they've
launched Luna 15, a secret
unmanned moon probe,
in a standard rocket.
>> They were going to go
to the moon, pick up a bit
of dirt, take it back, and say,
"Look ... look at how clever
we Soviets are.
We've gone there, we've brought
back some soil without risking
human life, at a fraction
of the cost, and look at how
much money the Americans wasted
in this silly political
competition with us. "
>> Narrator: If the two rockets
perform according to plan,
they will be in the moon's orbit
at the same time.
NASA keeps the news
from the public.
But Apollo astronauts Michael
Collins, Neil Armstrong,
and Buzz Adrin are informed.
>> My father never expressed any
concern on my part,
And I think ...
he is a good enough engineer
to understand the probabilities
of there actually being some
sort of a collision.
Space is a very big place
and the prospect of two
spacecraft colliding is pretty
unlikely.
>> Narrator: The next day,
Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong
become the first people
in history to set foot
to set foot on the moon.
Armstrong is the first off
the spacecraft.
>> That's one small step
for man, one giant leap
for mankind.
>> Narrator: The "Apollo 11"
mission is a shining achievement
for the American space program.
The Luna 15 meets a darker
and little known fate as it
crashes into the lunar surface.
The high drama of the moon race
has its origins in
the V2 missile programs of Nazi
Germany.
By the end of World War II,
America and Russia are moving
into position for the cold war.
Both countries want Germany's
rocket research.
>> The fact that Nazi Germany
spent all that money, and used
all those people, including
the slave laborers to build
rockets to bombard london, saved
the American and Russian missile
and space programs a decade
or more.
>> Narrator: America acts
quickly.
Within months of the war's end,
100 of the top German rocket men
are in the United States.
The press is told they are truck
drivers, but the Germans know
what they will be working on ...
rockets.
Among them is Wernher Von Braun,
the director of the Nazi
V2 program and the man who will
help lead America to the moon.
As important as the Germans
were, it was the rockets
themselves, the V2s, which would
be the foundation for both
the American and Soviet missile
programs.
The Soviet missile program is
led by an unlikely figure,
Sergei Korolev, a rocket
scientist who had spent years
in a gulag prison, a victim
of Stalin's purges.
>> In those days it was
necessary for just
one of your colleagues to say
you were disloyal.
And a colleague, we think, made
the claim that he wasn't working
seriously on the rockets that
were for the military defense
program, but had these fantasies
about space.
In any case, Korolev gets
arrested, sent to the gulag,
almost dies, works in the gold
mines.
Was there for ... it's not clear
how long, maybe as long
as a year.
>> Narrator: Korolev is rescued
because of his mathematical
education, aeronautical
knowledge, and personal
connections, but mostly
because the Soviet military
needs him to design planes.
Out of prison, one of Korolev's
jobs in the 1950s is to counter
the threat of America's
Strategic Air Command.
America's huge bomber fleet is
armed with nuclear warheads
and on-call 24 hours a day.
To the Soviets it's like
a dagger pointed at
their throat.
By 1957, Korolev is ready
to test his own creation, the R-7
intercontinental ballistic
missile, or ICBM.
Korolev's R-7 has four strap-on
boosters that can power it
into interplanetary altitudes
and then explode it
into American soil.
The R-7 is revolutionary:
the first missile that can
deliver a nuclear warhead
from one continent to another.
But Korolev's new engine design
is not yet dependable.
Meanwhile, a world away
in New Mexico, America is having
its own struggles with its
modified V2.
Finally, on August 21st, 1957,
Korolev's R-7 became the world's
first ICBM to fly successfully,
disintegrating harmlessly,
as planned, thousands of miles
from its launching point.
Suddenly, President Eisenhower
is in political trouble.
He's put America's resources
into its huge arsenal of B-52s,
instead of missiles.
Congress quickly declares that
America is in danger ...
on the wrong side of a missile
gap.
October 4th, 1957, another shock
for America.
The Soviets send Sputnik 1 into
space on top of another Korolev
R-7 rocket.
It is the first successful orbit
of a man made satellite,
and the United States is left
reeling by the unexpected
display of Russian rocket know
how.
President Eisenhower tries
to quell American panic.
>> Our satellite program has
never been conducted as a race
with other nations.
I consider our country's
satellite program to be well
designed and properly scheduled
to achieve the scientific
purposes for which it was
initiated.
>> Narrator: Just four weeks
after Sputnik1's success,
the Soviets launch "Sputnik 2."
This time with a passenger:
a dog named Laika,
meaning barker.
Laika survives for several days
in space.
"Sputnik 2" is another
impressive success
for the Soviet Union.
>> This is a country that had
been Marched on, stomped on ...
and had a long, you know,
years of, decades of, feudalism.
And suddenly, in the '50s
and '60s, they're being told,
"You are the best
and exhibit "A" is our space
program, which is the best
in the world. "
This was the first time that
the Russian people had ever
believed that they were
a superpower.
>> Narrator: Under pressure
from the Russians,
The Unites States rushes
to get an American satellite.
On December 6, 1957,
a Navy-designed Vanguard rocket
Is ready, or so the U.S. thinks.
The grapefruit-sized satellite
it carries is America's answer
to Sputnik.
>> And a huge, huge ball of fire
rising up perhaps 100 feet.
>> Narrator: It's a humiliating
failure for the United States.
At the U.N., Soviet delegates ask
if the United States might wish
to receive foreign aid
under Moscow's program
of technical assistance
to backward nations.
But there is much Khrushchev is
keeping secret.
>> We never saw video footage
or TV footage of the Soviet
rockets blowing up, because it
was done in secrecy.
And even the R-7 only flew
successfully on its fourth
attempt, whereas the U.S.
Program was in the full
limelight of the media.
>> Narrator: On
January 31st, 1958, America
finally gets its first satellite
into orbit.
It's the Army's Explorer 1,
and it uses a rocket built
under the direction of Wernher
von Braun.
Eisenhower makes a decision that
will change America's space
program forever ... He unifies
all research into one
department.
In October of 1958, a new
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration ... NASA ... takes
over the job.
NASA's first step is to choose
seven pilots who will be
America's first men in space.
To the country they are more
than astronauts, they are
a nation's hope to restore
its technological self-esteem.
>> We went for military test
pilots who were all
in their 30s ... in fact,
John glenn was 40 ... who had
degrees or a lot of experience
in engineering, whereas
the Russians got a bunch
of younger men who were not
remotely well educated
by the Mercury standards.
They didn't need to be very
experienced, they just sort
of needed to be healthy
and trainable.
>> Narrator: Sergei Korolev,
seen here next to his wife,
would lead this group
into the frontier of space.
Six would become Russia's first
cosmonauts.
One would become Russia's first
casualty.
These cosmonauts would be
the Soviet's answer to NASA's
Mercury seven.
¶
But no amount of training can
eliminate human error.
In March 1961, Valentin
Bondarenko becomes the first
casualty of the Soviet program.
>> Valentin Bondarenko was
the youngest member of the first
group of 20 Soviet cosmonauts
and he made a very forgivable
human error.
He literally removed
an electrode and used an alcohol
soaked cotton swab to clean
the place where the electrode
or probe had been on his skin
and just flicked it toward
a table.
Unfortunately it landed on a hot
plate that he had to cook food
during this test and it just
sparked.
And the pure oxygen environment
fed anything that was in it,
caught on fire, and they could
not get him out in time.
>> Narrator: Inside the Soviet
missile program competition
between rival divisions
is fierce.
One key player is
Marshal Mitrofan Nedelin, a man
of great bravery and even
greater arrogance.
He is so determined to develop
a rocket that can replace
Korolev's r- 7 as Russia's icbm
that he fuels his new rocket
with a volatile mixture
so dangerous it's known
As Devil's Venom.
>> Marshal Nedelin wanted to be
present at a very close
distance.
He instructed his team to bring
a chair, to place his just next
to the rocket.
So, everyone understood it was
a violation of the rules,
But he was a big boss so he was
sitting there.
And every rocket scientist,
every engineer, thought "should
I stay behind the walls,
or should I go to sit next
to the Marshal?
Otherwise I would be considered
as a coward. "
And dozens of people moved close
to Marshal Nedelin.
And then, unfortunately, there
was a big accident.
there was a huge explosion
and everyone, including
Marshal Nedelin, was killed.
>> Narrator: The fire burns
for hours, fed by millions
of pounds of kerosene
and liquid oxygen.
Those not burned outright
by the flames are splashed
with the corrosive acids
of the rocket fuel.
few escape.
In all, more than 150 people die
in the gruesome accident.
The Soviet ICBM program is set
back by the disaster,
but Korolev continues to forge
ahead with his plans to send
a cosmonaut into orbit.
His answer to NASA's Mercury is
the Vostok, a huge craft that
weighs nearly five tons.
NASA is just as determined.
They plan to jump ahead
of the Soviets by putting
an American into space
In May 1961.
Astronaut Alan Shepard is chosen
to pilot the first manned
"Mercury" rocket.
Nobody is sure if Shepard's
rocket, or Shepard, can survive
the flight.
But the Soviets surprise NASA.
At the last minute they announce
that they will launch a man
into orbit on April 12th, 1961,
one full month before NASA's
launch.
The cosmonaut chosen is
Yuri Gagarin, hand picked
by Sergei Korolev.
>> He liked the idea that
Gagarin was a simple son
of a peasant family, big smile
on his face.
And I think the reaction was
really very, very chemical,
you know, personal.
>> Narrator: On April 12th,
the 27-year-old Yuri Gagarin
sets out to make history.
A Vostok capsule, powered
by Korolev's R- 7 rocket, is
The vehicle that will take
the first man into orbit around
the earth.
Gagarin makes one earth orbit
in "Vostok 1."
The flight goes flawlessly,
but there is an important secret
the Soviets are keeping.
>> We didn't hear it officially
from the Soviets at the time,
because they were presenting
the fiction that he had landed
in his spacecraft.
Because the international
Aeronautical rules required that
a pilot had to take off
in his aircraft and land to set
a new record.
And they were treating this
as a new world record ...
the first space flight.
So they just flat-out lied
about it.
The genius of the original
design was, "Well, let's just
punch him out of there and let
him parachute down. "
It's like, "it's too hard
for him to land in
the spacecraft, let's get him
out of the spacecraft
at 20,000 feet. "
And that's what they did.
They just fired him out of it.
>> Narrator: Gagarin is hailed
as a conquering hero around
the world.
The Soviet Union has upstaged
America once again.
Between 1961 and 1963 the
Russian star shines brighter
than ever as each Vostok flight
confirms the Soviet's mastery
of space.
Valentina Tereshkova is out
to achieve another first
for the Soviets as the first
woman in space.
She is to pilot "Vostok 6"
into history.
Tereshkova takes off
on June 16th, 1963.
In another blow to American
pride, she logs in more flight
time ... 48 orbits ... Than all
the male Mercury astronauts
combined.
With Tereshkova's safe return
the Vostok series comes
to a triumphant end
and emphasizes the
the Soviet's lead in the space race.
>> Narrator: America's
Mercury flights end in 1963,
having failed to overtake the
Soviets in the space race.
The next U.S. Space program,
Gemini, is gearing up
for its first launch
in March 1965.
It will put, not one, but two
men, in space and provide
practice in docking maneuvers
crucial to the success of a moon
landing.
The Russians feel pressured
by Gemini.
Khrushchev orders Korolev
to beat the Americans into space
with, not two men, but three,
inside a capsule with
a pressurized interior.
Three can be crammed
into the new Voskhad spacecraft,
but not safely.
>> There were three cosmonauts
sent up in a Voskhad capsule,
which is basically just
a modified Vostok.
And now, the Vostok's had only
carried one person.
To squeeze three people in it
meant you had to take away
their pressure suits and there
was no escape system.
So, if the rocket blew up,
or something went wrong
during the launch, the three men
just fried.
>> Narrator: October 12th, 1964,
it is the first Voskhad launch,
And for the first time
thSoviets will not be using
An ejection seat.
The cosmonauts will return
to earth inside their capsule.
Retro-Rockets and parachutes
slow their descent
And the three-Man crew lands
safely, deep in Russia.
The Americans have been beaten
into space again.
In the spring of 1965 the
Soviets are readying a second
Voskhad mission for another
space age first.
Pavel belyayev and alexei leonov
are the crew.
Their mission ... The first walk
in space.
There is no third cosmonaut
on this trip, the extra space is
Needed for their spacesuits.
Leonov trains hard on earth,
but in space there are dangers
No one anticipates.
On March 18th, 1965, leonov
begins his historic space walk.
>> Leonov was really a guinea
pig.
He was trying out something that
had never been done before.
His spacesuit was pressurized,
obviously, because space is
A vacuum.
So, if you didn't wear
a spacesuit your blood would
Boil and you'd die very quickly.
Unfortunately, while he was out
in space, the air inside
His suit pushed it out.
It was rather like a balloon.
So, he was much bigger than
he would normally have been.
Now, when he tried to squeeze
back into the air-Lock entrance
He couldn't fit.
So, he therefore kept gradually
dropping the pressure, hoping
That it would become small
enough so that he could fit in.
And eventually he had to drop it
below the permitted safety
Limit, in fact, before he could
just about squeeze in feet
First.
But it was a real struggle.
>> Narrator: Leonov's problems
aren't over.
He and belyayev land off-Course
and spend a cold night alone
In the Russian wilderness before
being rescued.
The world is told nothing
of the flight's flaws.
For Korolev, the mission is
another success, and the last
Of the voskhad series.
He can concentrate now
on the spaceship that will take
His cosmonauts to the moon ...
The Soyuz.
The Soyuz has been
in development since sputnik ...
Nearly seven years.
The huge spacecraft weighs
almost 7 1/2 tons ... 1 1/2 times
The mass of its predecessor
the voskhad.
However, the first Soyuz manned
flight is still two years off.
>> "Gemini 12," "gemini 12."
>> Narrator: The Americans,
meanwhile, continue flying
Gemini missions.
Between 1965 and 1966, gemini
amasses almost 1,000 hours
In space ... The Russians voskhad
only 26.
America has caught up
in the space race.
The testing of Korolev's Soyuz
spacecraft moves forward
Under pressure from the Soviet
leadership.
It is at this crucial point that
Korolev, the master
Of the Soviet space program, is
hospitalized for routine
Surgery.
>> He goes into the hospital,
for what was supposed to have
Been a simple operation,
and he thought he was going
To be in over the weekend
and back to work on monday
Morning.
The surgeon discovers he's got
a huge, malignant tumor the size
Of a fist.
He issues an emergency call
to get help, they can't find
Help.
It was over the weekend.
They tried to fit an oxygen mask
On him and because he had had
his jaw broken in the gulag
They couldn't fit it properly.
>> Narrator: The operation fails
and Korolev is given a state
Funeral.
Ironically, he is honored
in death as his could not be in life.
For fear of what would happen if they
have allowed the world to know
Korolev's name.
The new chief designer is
vasili mishin, Korolev's former
Second in charge.
Although a talented engineer,
he lacks Korolev's
Organizational skills, political
connections, and sheer bullying
Power.
The loss of Korolev will haunt
the Soviet space program
For years to come.
NASA is under pressure, too,
to get a .....
on January 27th, 1967,
during a routine training
Mission in the "Apollo 1"
command module, a fire breaks
Out.
It quickly flares out of control
in the oxygen-Rich atmosphere
Inside the capsule.
Within 16 seconds the three
astronauts are dead.
The disaster is horrifyingly
predictable and preventable.
The cause ... Bad wires, faulty
installation and poor quality
Control in a spacecraft packed
with flammable materials.
The Apollo disaster might have
been avoided had the Soviets
Told the truth about
valentin bondarenko's death
In 1961.
That, too, involved a fire
in an oxygen rich atmosphere.
Devastates the American effort.
It will be two years before
NASA's next manned flight.
The American disaster provides
the Soviets with an irresistible
Opportunity to retake the lead
in the space race.
They rush the Soyuz
in to readiness for a launch
In the spring of 1967.
Cosmonaut vladimir komarov is
scheduled to pilot the new Soyuz
Spacecraft.
>> It was clear that
the administration wanted
Because it, of course, was to be
launched along with another
Soyuz, in which there would be
a rendezvous, if not a docking
Maneuver.
And this was all going to happen
at the 40th anniversary
Of the glorious October
socialist revolution.
>> Narrator: Soyuz engineers
asked brezhnev for more time
To perfect "Soyuz 1,"
but brezhnev refuses.
They must launch on time.
>> It seems likely that
the "Soyuz 1" was
A fundamentally flawed
spacecraft.
And that the cosmonauts,
the designers, those people that
Really understood the program
believed that they were likely
To have a very big problem
with it.
>> Narrator: On
April 23rd, 1967, "Soyuz 1,"
With cosmonaut vladimir komarov
is launched.
The mission gets off
to an ominous start.
>> "Soyuz 1," unfortunately,
lost a solar panel,
And therefore didn't have enough
power to stay up long enough
For "Soyuz 2" to come
and rendezvous with it.
So they decided to take komarov
back down again.
>> Komarov was having just
a difficult time orienting
The spacecraft, getting it to do
what he wanted.
The real problem was that
the parachute system just
Suffered a series of failures.
The first chute did not deploy
properly and then did not
Separate properly.
The emergency chute fouled
withhat and the spacecraft
Never slowed down.
It just hit the earth at, how
ever many ... 250 miles an hour.
>> Narrator: Komarov has
no chance.
The crash is so thunderous
recovery teams cannot even
Distinguish human remains
from the wreckage.
Details of the disaster are
a closely guarded secret.
Komarov will be remembered,
however.
He is the first person to die
during a mission to space.
>> Narrator: By 1968, America's
Apollo program is back on track
after the Apollo 1 disaster.
That same year the Russians
struggle to iron out
The problems of Soyuz.
And the Soviets do just that.
On October 30th, 1968, "Soyuz 2"
and "Soyuz 3" return
Successfully from a joint
mission in space.
For the first time a Soyuz
spacecraft has returned to earth
With its cosmonaut alive.
Two months later,
on December 21st, 1968,
"Apollo 8" takes frank borman,
Jim lovell, and William anders
Around the moon.
The Soviets must respond
if they are to stay in the race.
The Russians answer
the challenge on
January 14th, 1969, when
"Soyuz 4" and "Soyuz 5" make
the world's first link-Up
Between manned spacecraft.
The Soviet dream of reaching
the moon is tantalizingly close.
But to get there they need
the massive N1 rocket.
It is the only Soviet rocket
powerful enough to reach
The moon.
First envisaged by Korolev
in 1961, the N1 is finally ready
For its first test launch eight
years later.
On February 21st, 1969,
the N1 finally takes off.
The N1 finally takes off.
If performs beautifully
for approximately 70 seconds.
With the N1 disaster,
the Soviets lose all hope
Of winning the moon race,
but they still have hopes
The N1 will get there before
the end of the decade.
Five months later they launch
another N1.
And the Soviet dream of reaching
the moon goes up in flames.
On July 20th, 1969, the race
to the moon ends in triump
For America.
The mysterious surface that has
fascinated humanity for so long
Finally is conquered.
>> That's one small step
for man, one giant leap
For mankind.
>> Narrator: However,
the Soviets do not give up
Their dreams of glory in space.
Instead they simply exchange
moon landings for space
Stations.
The construction of the salyut
space stations during the 1970s
Becomes the burning focus
of the Soviet space program.
The first of Russia's space
stations is the salyut 1.
This Soviet animation shows that
salyut 1 has four cylinders
Of differing diameters
and lengths.
Three of them are pressurized.
The fourth, which houses
The propulsion unit, is open
to space.
The Soviets plan to launch
the salyut space station
Unmanned.
Later, a three-Man crew, flying
separately aboard a spacecraft
Will dock with the station.
In April 1971 the world's first
space station is successfully
Put into orbit.
Having reached orbit
successfully, the station is
Ready for its first occupants.
Vladislav volkov, georgi
dobrovolski and viktor patsayev
Will be the "salyut 1"'s first
visitors.
In order for all three to fit
into the "Soyuz 11" they must
Leave behind their pressurized
suits.
The Soviets had been sending
cosmonauts into space this w
Since "voskhad 1."
It's a big risk, but they're out
to make history.
On June 6th, 1971, the three
cosmonauts are launched
In "Soyuz 11" from the baikonur
cosmodrome.
"Soyuz 11" docks successfully
with the salyut station.
>> This mission was the first
time the Russians had had
A space station up there.
The whole country, from kiev
To vladivostok, had been
thrilled to watch these guys
On television for weeks.
They came to know them,
they knew each of them.
>> Narrator: After
an unprecedented 23 days
In space, it is time
for the 3 cosmonauts to come
>> They had contact up until,
basically, the moment
Of retrofire, the valve that was
supposed to open in the lower
Atmosphere to let fresh air
in opened earlier, and let
The life-Sustaining air out.
The air whistled out of that
space craft in the space
Of about 30, 40 seconds.
>> And as a result, the capsule
was depressurized, patsayev
Actually got out of his seat
and recognized what the problem
Was but was unable to close it
fast enough.
>> And when the rescue crews
came to open up the capsule,
They wondered why everything was
so quiet, there were no radio
Communications going on.
And they found these three men
Just strapped in their seats,
just lying there.
>> Narrator: The cosmonauts
cannot be revived.
Without pressure suits,
their blood has literally
Boiled.
The Soviets have lost
the dangerous gamble to fly
Without pressure suits.
By the three cosmonauts
and their families.
The Soviets would startle
the world by agreeing to a joint
The united states.
For the U.S., it would be
the last of the historic
"Apollo" missions.
The world's first docking
between spacecraft from two
Different nations is complet
on July 17th, 1975.
>> It was a soft docking.
>> Ha ha!
They're secured.
>> Glad to see you here.
>> Narrator: The hostility
between the superpowers that has
Cost so many lives and so much
money is dissolved in the good
Will of the moment.
>> Narrator: By the 1980s,
the Soviet visits
To their salyut space stations
had become almost routine.
Had become almost routine.
On September 26th, 1983,
"Soyuz t10" is rolled out
To the launch pad as cosmonauts
vladimir titov and
Gennadi strekalov anxiously
await an evening liftoff.
>> During the last minute
of the countdown, a fire broke
Out at the base of their "Soyuz"
launch vehicle.
Both titov and strekalov have
said that they were sitting
There knowing, they could see
flames rising, they knew
Something was wrong, but nothing
was really happening.
They had to wait for a launch
control team to initiate
The abort.
So it was a nerve-wracking
20 seconds waiting.
"When are they going to get us
t of here?"
And the automatic escape system,
which had never been tested
With people on board, got
its test.
The solid rocket motor
on the front of the "Soyuz"
Fired, pulling the vehicle,
I think, about four
Or five miles high.
>> Narrator: Cosmonauts titov
and strekalov have come within
Moments of a fiery death.
While both will fly again
on later, successful missions,
This aborted launch is ner
officially recognized.
As the 1980s continue, so does
NASA's new space shuttle, as it
Replaces the old "Saturn 5"
workhorse.
For the first time in six years,
Americans are going into space.
>> Four, three, two, one, zero.
>> And we have liftoff.
Liftoff of America's first space
shuttle.
>> Narrator: While the shuttle
is perceived as a great success,
The reality is that it's much
more expensive than
The "Saturn 5" to operate.
And many in NASA think it's
A costly mistake.
However, this doesn't keep
the Soviets from craving shuttle
Technology.
>> The key member of ... Who was
responsible for military
Industrial complex, he said,
"there is one critical argument.
Americans are doing it.
Do you think they e stupid?
They are very pragmatic,
and if they are doing it, it
Means that they know something
else.
Let's follow their example. "
>> NarratoR: Rumors began that
the reason for the remarkable
Similarity between the U.S.
Space shuttle and Soviet "buran"
Is not engineering,
but espionage.
>> I've seen their "buran,"
which is the title they use
For their shuttle, and it does
look very much like our shuttle.
I suspect that they probably had
drawings.
And they were never classified,
I don't think they would have
Been very hard to get.
I would be hard-Pressed to say
they stole them ...
In fact, if they wrote in,
we might have sent them to them.
I think they have very capable
engineers if they could develop
A system like that, but I don't
think they did.
>> I believe it was designed
independently.
And even if its shape looks
familiar, you know, the shape is
Dictated by aerodynamics.
>> The Soviet shuttle flew once.
Now it's in a city park
In Moscow.
It's in gorky park.
Basically, they ran out
of money.
I mean, at a time where
in 1990 their budget started
Going steeply down, the "buran"
was just eating up a lot
Of money.
And so, as a result, it's
sitting in a park right now.
>> Narrator: Soviet resources go
instead to their
Third-Generation space station.
It's called "mir," meaning
Peace.
On February 20th, 1986, "mir" is
successfully launched.
"Mir" has six docking ports,
which allow unmanned scientific
Modules to dock with
the station.
It's remarkably flexible.
Modules can return to earth when
their missions are complete
To be replaced by new modules
carrying different experiments.
While the Russians were able
to fund the initial construction
Of "mir," the cosmonauts have
had to result to some unusual
Capitalist antics to keep it
afloat.
>> The Russian cosmonauts these
days have a really difficult
And ironic job.
They're asked to do
an increasing number of kind
Of really cheap things, like
milk commercls and things.
And they hate it.
And you can understand that.
They're cosmonauts.
They shouldn't have to do milk
commercials.
>> Discovering a magnificent
picture of "mir" crossing
The horizon.
>> Narrator: "Mir" was meant
to last only five years.
It is now approaching
its 13th birthday and is
Fighting the American perception
that it's outdated equipment
Ready for the cosmic junk yard.
>> Certainly a lot of things
broke.
The Soviets, or the Russians
now, have demonstrated that
They can improvise when problems
come up.
Now, often, they do it in ways
that makes us very nervous.
And the risk they take is quite
often more than we would like
To take.
>> When something goes wrong up
there, ever since 1971,
They have to fix it up there.
And that's given them
an expertise and sort of seat
of the pants repairs that
Americans have only read
About in books.
And it's the one thing that
people in NASA are kind
Of sniping and making snide
comments about how the Russian
program is falling apart.
It's the one thing that
we really realize that
The Russians have over us is
that type of experience.
>> Narrator: In the 1990s,
the strengths of both
The Russian and American space
programs would finally come
Programs would finally come
together.
By may 2001, the 2 nations,
along with 14 other countries,
Woulcomplete the world's first
international space station.
The Soviet space program led
the race to the moon
From 1957 to 1967, but due
to the program setbacks,
The technological advancements
of the united states ultimately
Prevailed.
But despite the bitter cold war,
the universal quest
For knowledge endured.
Today, global cooperation
in space is a reality.